In this section we describe the principles and requirements from which our approach
emerged. Consisting of three main components: an upper ontology, a domainspecific ontology, and an ABM framework, along with an approach for using these in a longitudinal simulation-building effort, for scientific and/or practical purposes. To implement these three components, several tools and technologies were used, including RDF and
Turtle syntax for the encoding of the ontologies, GraphDB for managing and querying RDF data, Java for programming the ABM framework, and Apache Jena to load data in the framework from the ontologies. We describe the assumptions for these choices below. Lastly, due to the inherent novelty in this approach, steps to verify, validate,
and test the approach are presented.

# Development approach
 ## (1) identifying the problem, challenges or limitations the approach aims to address, 
 ## (2) reviewing existing methodologies and key implementations within the domain, 
 ## (3) defining a list of requirements and objectives, including encompassing outcomes, scope, and target audience.

The key problems our approach aims to address are two-fold:
## I. To address the limitations of current ABM implementations, particularly with respect to the integration of new information and the potential resource-intensive nature of adjustments, which may not be feasibly given the complexity of the overall systems,
## II. To facilitate the continued collaboration among a diverse range of experts from various disciplines, each contributing unique insights to the target social phenomenon under investigation.

Based on the review of existing techniques and taking into account the problems to be addressed, the following list of  requirements was devised for the long-term vision of the proposed approach:
## 1. Empowering domain experts researching complex (social) systems to focus on subsets of their research without losing sight of or abandoning its relationship with its superset, including the larger context and variables. This includes
### a) Promoting the reuse of mechanisms intrinsic to the study of various dependent variables, independent of the phenomenon under consideration.
### b) Facilitating modifications to the factors considered in the simulation and their representation within the ABM, ensuring adaptability to evolving domain knowledge.
## 2. Enable system improvements (e.g. scalability, decentralization, communications) without interfering with domain-knowledge and representation.
## 3. Ensure a seamless and transparent translation of domain concepts to their corresponding representations in the ABM.
## 4. Give domain experts a new framework and tool for working on complex models of social phenomena, including
### a) those with minimal knowledge of ABMs,
### b) allow anyone, from novice to expert, to easily incorporate both hypothetical and empirical information pertaining to the target phenomenon,
### c) provide a platform with the potential to produce a comprehensible visualization of domain information,
### d) minimize the learning curve for domain-experts to understand how their models of the world are employed within the tool.

The system should be designed as a modular whole, encompassing: a module for describing a phenomenon in the context of ABM components using a standard structure, and another module that employs this information to execute a simulation, ensuring that the domain-specific information remains as separate as possible from the ABM approach. As previously mentioned, ontologies can serve as a valuable instrument in formalizing a specific domain of interest, providing a means to represent entities, properties, and interrelations, encouraging reuse and extension of knowledge represented among disparate information communities. They are well-suited for the module responsible for describing a phenomenon; however, current ontological frameworks offer only a general nomenclature for representing a domain, such as classes, instances, properties, and interrelations. To depict a domain in the context of ABM, a structure tailored to accommodate ABM components is required: An upper ontology encompassing the definition of agents, environments, parameters, perceptions, decisions, actions, and their
interplay. While hybrid ontologies are useful in certain domains, our decision to construct two separate ontologies - upper-level and domain-specific - is deeply rooted in our anticipated use-case for the latter ontology. Our approach is intended to allow for the creation of diverse domain-specific ontologies tailored to distinct thematic simulations.
Each of these ontologies leverages concepts embedded within the upper-ontology and may utilize previously defined domain-specific representations, enhancing efficiency and promoting consistency across different ontologies. In essence, our bifurcated ontology structure enables versatility in catering to different simulations while promoting the reuse of established concepts. With the addition of the upper ontology, the final designated modules in the approach are: (1) An upper ontology describing general terms encapsulating the components of an ABM; (2) a domain-specific ontology describing the phenomenon to
simulate using the general terms from the upper-ontology; (3) an ABM framework that utilises the domain information and executes a simulation given pre-defined settings. For the ABM framework to be capable of simulating the information in the
domain-specific ontology, it needs (a) a component that parses information from the ontology, (b) a component that initializes agents required to run the simulation given that information and initialisation settings such as population demographics and other statistics, (c) a component that controls and executes the simulation. 

Consequently, if our approach can effectively represent a list of necessary scenarios for this
phenomenon, it should, by extension, be capable of representing other less complex social systems. The identified scenarios included (1) substance consumption, as the primary focus of the subject matter is substance use, the modeling of this core activity was a requirement; (2) routines and commitments, chosen due to their association with delinquent behavior and the increased propensity for drug use; (3) modeling protective and risk factors of varying importance depending on the factors included, e.g. in the inclusion of both parental monitoring and support, the first has a stronger impact as a protective
factor; (4) the effects of peer activities on agent behavior, this scenario targeted cases in which the perception of certain events or messages would directly affect the agent’s propensity or hesitancy to perform some actions (e.g. peer pressure, peer substance use, bullying, social integration); (5) modeling planning, although actions may not be available at the time, we needed to model mechanisms necessary for agents to decide to make the action available, e.g. not having cigarettes but wanting to smoke.

# OR FOR PYTHON Tools & Technologies
## Encode Ontological Structures: RDF and Turtle syntax with Python's rdflib library for handling.
## Facilitate the Extraction of Pertinent Information from Ontologies: SPARQL queries via rdflib.
## Store and Visualize Ontologies: ArangoDB for graph storage and visualization. JSON storage is also supported.
## Programming the ABM Framework: Mesa for Python-based agent-based modeling.
## Facilitate the Parsing and Effective Use of the Ontologies: rdflib for Python, capable of parsing RDF formats and running SPARQL queries, with data stored in JSON.

The Resource Description Framework (RDF) was selected as the fundamental framework for conceptual representation in the development of the ontologies. The Turtle syntax was chosen for encoding the relationships between concepts in the form of triples. GraphDB was chosen to store, manage and query the RDF data. Python was selected as the programming language for the ABM framework.

As this novel approach introduces a distinct process to developing ABMs targeting social phenomena, it necessitates a reevaluation of the verification, validation, and testing (VV&T) processes to accommodate the additional steps in the model cycle. The VV&T process within our approach must be conducted at three distinct levels: (1) upper ontology, (2) domain-specific ontology, and (3) ABM Framework. The initial iteration of the ontology-driven approach concludes with the ABM framework generating simulation data. Although the subsequent step involves comparing the simulation data with available empirical data and obtaining expert verification of the simulation outcomes, in cases where the outcomes are deemed unsatisfactory, a comprehensive review of this approach is required, addressing the following aspects: 1. Upper ontology: Does the upper ontology encompass the essential concepts to adequately represent the phenomenon under study? A thorough examination of the ODD protocol or other model description methods used is necessary to evaluate the generalization capabilities of the upper ontology concerning the subject matter. It is important to note that should the ontology lack specific terms to represent a particular effect, the initial assessment should focus on the model description, as some described mechanisms may be too specific to the phenomenon and could be alternatively represented through existing mechanisms represented in the current upper ontology version. VV&T Method: Taxonomy evaluation through the check of inconsistencies, incompleteness, and redundancies of concepts included in the ontology [38], and in comparison with respect to existing ABM components required to model the phenomenon through the ODD protocol or any other model descriptions utilized. 2. Domain-specific ontology: Are the theoretical models within the phenomenon accurately represented using the most appropriate terms or mechanisms? The representation of certain effects using the upper ontology terms warrants a review to determine if it is the most suitable way to depict the effect or the emergence of an effect. VV&T Method: In consultation with domain experts, checking the ontology against real world representation and language. Consistency checks of similar interactions and their representations. Sensitivity checks to small changes in definition, ensuring the rest of the representations do not collapse. [38] 3. ABM Framework: Similar to contemporary ABM implementations, the ABM Framework must be assessed for correctness on multiple levels for its underlying mechanisms. Should the framework behave as intended, model tuning may be required to fit the phenomenon and behaviors expected. That is, for the action value calculated in the decision-making process, the fine-tuning and balancing of action component importance and values should be addressed. VV&T Method: Formulation of test cases to evaluate the model based on the sequence in which processes are executed. Verification of emergent behavior through the analysis of observed macro-level outcomes and ensuring these are not pre-programmed or explicitly defined. Ensuring agent heterogeneity reflected in population demographics and input through the simulation initialization parameters. Corroborating information flows in a decentralized manner, such that agents and processes do not rely on a central source for information. Model is robust under various conditions such as changes in parameters, initial conditions, or agent behaviors to assess if the outcome remains consistent with the expect behavior [36]. The proposed VV&T steps (1) and (3) should be conducted whenever new concepts are introduced to the upper ontology, this is because following their addition to the ontology, the mechanisms for retrieving the data and incorporating it into the ABM are required to utilize them in the ABM framework. Step (2) should be carried out when representing a social phenomenon in an iterative manner, ensuring the concepts are accurately represented using the upper ontology concepts. Step (3) should also be conducted when the ABM framework is being utilized without any changes to the rest of the components.
